Hello, everybody, and hello, Michael.
Hello, hello.
I'm excited to get through some exciting topics today.
Yeah, exciting. We'll make it fast.
Okay.
Hello, and welcome to Python.
Huh?
Sorry, Brian. Didn't mean to cut you off there.
Do it again. Do it again.
Hello, and welcome to Python Bytes,
where we deliver Python news and headlines directly to your earbuds.
This is episode 395, recorded August 6th,
and I am Brian Hawken.
And I'm Michael Kennedy.
And it is way too hot still.
I thought we were going to be done with the heat by now,
but it's crazy.
It is August.
This week's episode is sponsored by us,
so please check out the offerings we have.
We've got courses at both Talk Python and at Python Test,
and we've got Patreon supporters.
We don't shout out to them much,
but we do appreciate Patreon supporters, so thank you.
If you'd like to connect with us,
we're all on FostersOn,
at mkennedy,
at Brian Hawken,
and at Python Bytes.
But, of course,
those links are in the show notes.
And if you're listening to us later than Tuesday at Pacific Time,
10 o'clock,
you can catch us either on podcast,
but also you can watch live if you ever want to do that.
Usually Tuesdays at 10 a.m. Pacific Time,
and we appreciate that.
And also,
really appreciate everybody signing up for the show notes email.
That's been going really well,
and it grows every week,
and we are going to do a giveaway.
We haven't met our milestone that we're looking for yet,
but we'd love to give out some free stuff to people.
So sign up for that.
Brian,
let me motivate some folks.
13.
That's how many we need.
13 more,
and we're doing our giveaway.
All right.
Okay.
We just need 13 more people.
So get on that.
What do you have for us first,
Michael?
Well,
you know what I really like about that giveaway is that it's totally free.
As in free threaded Python.
Let's go.
So last time we talked about some of the,
remember we talked about,
I think it was Simon Willison,
hopefully the attribution is correct,
about installing how there's a binary installer
for free threaded Python.
Yeah.
Right.
Well,
in there,
I think he was linking to,
but certainly I talked to Stan Siebert from Anaconda,
and that's coming out in Otock Python shortly,
and he pointed out
py-free-threading.github.io,
which is a website that tracks,
gives you some advice on how to create your package
or update your package so that it works.
It works in free threaded Python,
but also,
most importantly,
it has a status tracker for popular packages.
So you can look and see,
are there wheels for free threaded Python?
Because apparently,
did you know that?
There's special wheels,
like you could have wheels for Linux,
wheels for macOS Intel version,
wheels for macOS ARM version,
but there's also specific wheels for free threaded Python.
So that's interesting.
Maybe you have different compiler flags
with threading primitives built in versus skipped
in that version or something along those lines.
Anyway,
so it has a compatibility tracker for that.
It talks about installing it,
which really means installing it on Linux.
That's really,
I think,
all it covers.
But yeah,
it gives you some more examples,
how to verify that you're running free threaded Python,
and so on.
Yeah,
what I'm really excited about here
is the last two bullets at the top
talking about setting up CI
and finding,
testing,
and debugging currency issues.
Yeah,
yeah,
for sure.
That didn't really occur to me,
Dale,
you just brought it up,
that if you have a popular package
or even a semi-popular package
or one you rely on,
you probably want to start testing it
to make sure that it's not going to break in
free threaded Python.
Indeed.
All right,
so let's look at the compatibility real quick here.
Compatibility.
It says,
this page,
and you can see it's got a big,
grid of,
of statuses,
basically.
It's not that long,
so if you have a package
and you expect it to work with
free threaded Python and stuff,
submit it here
so we can see its status.
Anyway,
the page says,
this page tracks the status of packages
for which we're aware of
active work on free threaded Python support.
It contains pages with extension modules
as well as build tools and packages
that need code specifically
directly to support free threaded.
Now,
it also says,
note that pure Python code works
without changes by design,
so it does not track pure Python packages.
Oh,
okay.
two things.
One,
so if you have a pure Python package,
don't try to submit it.
Hey,
here's our status.
It's like,
well,
you already got that,
so you can just probably do any
for your platform
and your wheel
and you're good to go.
but there's a difference between executes and works.
In my mind,
it says pure Python code works without changes.
Pure Python code will run in free threaded mode
without any changes by design.
It's kind of like saying it compiles in a static language,
so it's fine.
It may be built to have a bunch of race conditions,
but it doesn't need a special wheel.
You know what I mean?
So don't take too much confidence
that it's just pure Python,
right?
Your pure Python code can have five steps,
four of which have invalid state,
and if those things run in parallel
and one of them observes that state
while the other one is halfway through its steps,
you're going to have a bad time,
even if it's pure Python,
even though it executes.
So just a bit of a statement
if I'm threading there in general, right?
But if you look through here,
there's some interesting things, Brian.
So for example,
CI build will is tested in CI,
has a PyPI release,
so you can pip install it.
It talks about which version first supports it,
but it does not have nightly wheels
or a nightly wheel link.
On the other hand,
CMake only has PyPI releases.
Contour.py only is tested in CI,
but is not available on PyPI.
And it talks about which platforms
have nightly wheels
and then their links and so on.
So you can go through this list.
For example, NumPy is tested,
but there's no release of NumPy
at the moment.
But there are nightly wheels
that theoretically,
I guess you could use if you want.
Pip install from there.
We've got pandas, same status.
A lot of them are,
that's the most common.
They're tested in CI,
but they're not yet pushed to PyPI,
which is fair.
You know,
there is no release of Python
that has free threading,
officially.
There's only betas, right?
So,
the fact that they're not just pushing
this stuff out to PyPIs.
Thank you.
Also,
interesting,
notice here,
Brian,
there's pip.
even though,
it's pip pure Python?
I don't know.
I thought so.
But check this out.
So if you go over to the installing section,
it says,
okay,
basically,
you can get some binary installers
off of pypi.org,
or here's a bunch of talk
about how to set it up on Linux,
how to set it up on Docker for Linux
and build it from source.
If you run it,
it says,
here's how you run
with the guild disabled.
So if you run
with Python dash,
capital V,
you'll see,
it'll start and say,
Python,
such and such,
experimental free threading build.
Right?
Sounds so lovely.
you know.
Yes,
it does.
You're living so far
in the future,
aren't you?
And then here you can,
there's a little one-liner
you can execute
to see that it,
that it's working.
Yep.
Talks about
porting extensions modules
to free threading
and here you go,
Brian.
GitHub actions.
Let's go.
It talks about how to set
the GitHub actions
and a bunch of code
on how to actually test
and debug
all the things.
I love that.
How to set up CI.
And by that,
we mean how to set up
GitHub actions.
It's fair enough
at this point.
It is consolidating
a bit,
isn't it?
It is,
yes.
All right.
So,
if you are interested
in free threaded Python,
a.k.a.
the one that has had
the Gilectomy done to it
by Sam Gross and crew,
this is a good resource
to have around.
And if you have a package
that you think
might need some special
treatment to work
in that space
and you have intentions
to potentially support that,
you know,
let these folks know about it.
You can see their GitHub
in the top right.
I'm sure you can submit
an issue or something there.
Yep.
Nice.
Well,
if you need support,
change your transition here,
supporting,
if you want to support
free threading,
great,
but also,
we want to be a supportive
Python community.
so,
I did it.
A nice transition there
to Python's supportive
and welcoming environment
is tightly coupled
to its progress.
This is a post
on the Python Software
Foundation blog
and it is
very nice.
I think that everybody
should go read this
and the,
one of the reasons
that indicate
that maybe this is
kind of important
is this is signed
by
a whole bunch
of people.
Deb Nicholson,
Don Wages,
Tanya,
Quan Han,
Kushal,
Georgie,
Janice,
Christian,
Christopher,
Denny,
and
Chook,
and Simon Wilson.
Lots of signers
of this.
So,
what is this?
I want to highlight
a couple,
a couple statements
here.
Python is popular
as it is,
is as popular
as it is today
because we have
gone above and beyond
to make this
a welcoming community.
Being a friendly
and supportive community
is part of how we
are perceived
by a wider world
and is integral
to the wide
popularity of Python.
I totally believe
this.
We even won,
apparently,
won a wonderfully
welcoming award
at last year's
GitHub Universe
and it's often
referred to as
like,
come for the language,
stay for the community
sort of a thing.
however,
with the recent
bylaws changes,
there was a lot
of drama
on the mailing list.
So much drama
that we had,
even though
there were only
a thousand people
approximately
subscribed
to a
PSF vote
mailing list,
45 of those
people dropped out.
I think probably
because of the
toxicity
that was going
on on that
mailing list.
So,
this is a good
reminder that
we are a welcoming
community and we
want it that way.
I like another,
I'm going to hop
down,
there's a lot of
information in history
if you're curious.
I like this statement
here,
we have a moral
imperative as one
of the very best
places to bring
new people
into tech
and into
open source
to keep
being good
at welcoming
new people.
If we do not
rise and continue
to rise every
day to this
task,
then we are not
fulfilling our
own mission
to support
and facilitate
the growth
of a diverse
and international
community of
Python programmers.
Goes on to
talk about how
technical skills
are a game
changer for
people that are
trying to
better their
position,
try to get a
better job.
Python is a
great way to
get into tech
and into
programming and
we need to
make sure that
that stays a
great pathway.
So,
kind of a
serious topic
but it's
serious to me
that the
future of
programming
stays with
this nice
on-ramp of
Python and
we maintain
this to be a
good place to
be.
So,
further
continuing,
some of the
consequences of
bad actions that
happened is that
the form and
the mailing list
and some of the
other avenues of
discussion will
be,
will be,
or they've
turned on
moderation and
they're going to
continue with
moderating it to
make sure that
there is not
toxic behavior
going on.
And I applaud
that.
I think that's
the right thing
to do with
something as
important as
communication from
the PSF and
Python.
soapbox over.
Cool.
Thanks for
sharing that.
I do think
making it
welcoming to
new people.
I think what
a Python's
powers,
superpowers,
is really that
people come and
they don't feel
intimidated.
Right?
They don't
consider themselves
programmers and
they kind of
accidentally slip
into like,
wait, I think I
just published a
package.
Does that make me a
programmer?
like six
months later?
And having the
community being
welcoming, not
just the syntax
and the tooling
counts.
Yeah.
I see a lot of
times people will,
like a lot of
Python goers,
for example,
will bring along
one of their
kids, even
though they've
been going for
a while,
bring one of
their kids and
having the kids
be able to go
off and learn
also and realize
that, hey,
this is kind
of a neat
place.
We're probably
getting software
engineers from
the community
just because of
this that maybe
would have not
considered it.
All right,
planting the seed
there.
So, all right.
You've got some
good news for us,
don't you?
I do.
Well, I have,
last week I have
planted a seed
and this week it
has grown.
So, I was
going to cover a
new topic, but I
want to have more
time to digest
it than I've
had.
So, let's, I
want to do a
follow-up instead,
right?
So, remember last
week I talked
about Uptime
Kuma, which is a
fancy self-hosted
monitoring tool and
a lot of folks
chimed in over on
Mastodon saying,
you've been using
this for years,
it's super awesome,
and so on.
I said, hey,
maybe I'll play
with this, that
would be cool,
right?
Yeah.
Well, guess
what?
If you go to
Python Bytes and
you scroll to the
bottom, server
status, right
there, and you
click on it, it
shows you the
Python Bytes
operational status.
What is the
status of the
website?
And all these
little green dots,
each one of these
are a sample of
either up, down,
partially up,
partially down,
I guess it was
the same thing.
But, so you
could see those
sort of like over
time.
I wish I could
control how much
time this is,
but this is
basically just
the samples,
some number of
recent samples,
and I think I've
got it set to
every minute or
two minute it
checks, and if it
goes wrong, it'll
send me an email,
something like that.
But you can also
see this 100%
of time, it's
basically since I
set it up, but I
think that's 30
days or something.
I'm not sure
exactly the window
of that, but that
is more, that
tracks more of
it.
But anyway, we've
got the Python
Bytes web, and
you can see its
certificate expires in
82 days, so
that's good, plenty
of time.
It's 90 days by
default.
So quite new.
The RSS feed, what
is it's status, the
CDN status that
actually delivers the
MP3s, which is a
whole separate bit of
infrastructure at
bunny.net, and the
MongoDB database
that powers the
website.
So you could see,
well, maybe the
website's down because
the database is
down, or there's
just a problem with
the website.
Isn't that cool?
It is pretty
cool, yeah.
And even more
involved because of
all the course stuff
is if you go to the
one for, at the
bottom of Talk
Python, you can see
you've got all those
things I described, but
also like the mobile
APIs, the video CDN,
the podcast CDN, the
courses website, all
those things.
And all are making me
smile with almost 100%
of time.
I think I broke when I
set it up.
I didn't configure the
setup right for RSS, so
it's got a little
lingering broken bit,
but I don't think
it's actually had any
downtime.
Okay, I was going to,
actually, I'm pleased to
see that because I was
just wondering if you're
rounding up to the
nearest 100.
No, no, this is like
to the, it's to the
100th, so it's like
99.86% up, but I
think it's just, I broke
it when I was trying to
set this thing up.
So, yeah, incredibly
easy, just.
This is cool.
Yeah, where's, there's,
so if you go here,
basically just Docker run,
and I've talked about
this whole Docker cluster
I've had, I've migrated
everything to all the
infrastructure too, and
adding this as a thing
that runs over there,
incredibly easy.
It took probably 20
minutes to get it set up
running as its own bit
of infrastructure, and now
it just chills in its own
Docker container watching
all the other things
around the world, so
very cool.
neat.
Yeah, so if, if you
want to play with that,
you can check that out
at the bottom of both of
the podcast websites in
their footers, same for
TalkByTheTraining as
well, it's in there as
well.
But basically, you know,
just, it's just an
example of someone putting
up uptime kuma, which
so far I'm, I'm pretty
happy with, and if, what
you see on the status
page is a public thing,
but if you log in, you
get a lot more detail of
like responses, response
time, overtime, and all
this.
So you can kind of use
it as a performance
monitoring thing as
well.
Oh, cool.
Yeah.
I should check that
out.
Indeed.
Neat.
All right.
Well, something else to
check out is something
upcoming, possibly in, in
Python.
There is a new pep.
Well, there's often new
peps, but here's PEP 751.
This is authored by Brett
Cannon and started at the,
created at the end of July
the 24th.
What is this?
this is peps 751, a file
format to list Python
dependencies for installation
and reproducibility, which
is a bit of a mouthful, but
and I actually, to be
honest, some of the
details in here is, are a
little detail oriented, but
I like to look the abstract
and the motivation to make
total sense.
So the idea is, well, I'll
just read it.
The, for the abstract, this
PEP proposes a new file
format for dependency
specification to enable
reproducible install,
install, enable reproducible
installation in a Python
environment.
The format is designed to be
human readable and machine
generated.
Installers consuming the
file should be able to
evaluate each package in
question in isolation with no
need for dependency resolution
at install time.
which is interesting.
So what's the idea?
I thought we had this
already, don't we?
We have dependency, but we
don't have like this whole
like lock file stuff is not
is not, is not a standard.
It's just implemented several
places.
So there's no, under
motivation, currently no
standard exists to specify
what top level dependencies
should be installed into a
Python environment and no
standard exists to create an
immutable record such as a
lock file of which dependencies
are installed.
There are at least five
well-known solutions to the
problem.
We've got pip freeze.
We have pip-tools.
UV has a solution.
Poetry and PDM all have a way
to deal with lock files in
general, but we don't have a
standard for this.
So I am, I guess, welcoming the
idea that, that, that this will
be a standard or something
similar to it.
This is early in the pep
lifecycle, but yeah.
Anyway, since it's a packaging
topic, these don't necessarily
have to come out at the same rate
as Python because pip is not pip and
other packaging tools are not on the
same year timeframe as, as, as
Python.
So not sure if, if it were when
this comes about.
So.
Yeah, definitely.
This is cool.
I actually had this open in another
tab.
I can, so I'd go close that now.
Thanks, Brian.
Because I wanted to read about
this.
This is exciting.
I always love what Brett Cannon's
working on.
Yeah.
I think I like the idea of
having a lock file that we can
use because you, every tool you
pick, it's got a solution, but
it's incompatible with all other
tools.
So some project uses poetry, for
example, to manage its
dependencies and you just, you
don't want to use that.
Yeah.
When you, you want to use
something else.
Like I'm a big fan of UV's
implementation of pip-tools.
well, that doesn't work with
it, or maybe it does, but you
know, like you've got to, you've
got to get, it depends on how
you're using it.
Right.
But having something
interoperable between these would
be nice to allow you to choose
your workflow.
Regardless.
One of the, one of the aspects in
here under rationale talked about,
which I think is pretty cool is
that the file format, the, the,
the tool that creates the file
doesn't necessarily have to be the
tool that reads and parses it.
The important thing around that
is that there might be like,
yeah, anybody you can, anybody
can create the lock file with
whatever tool you want, but a
service like, like, you know,
something like Anaconda or some
other service or, or a packager
that pulls everything in, they
might have their own standard way to
do all of that.
and it doesn't have to be, they
don't have to support flit and
PDM and all sorts of other tools.
I guess flit isn't one of the, on
the list, but you know what I
mean?
Yeah.
Lots of different things.
So yeah.
It'll be interesting to watch this
and see where this goes.
and as always, I appreciate how much
Brett thinks about packaging and
packaging was, I know that there's
that, that XKCD comic about packaging
being horrible in Python, but it's a
hard problem.
And I'm glad that we have bright
people like Brett and other folks he
knows to work on the hard problem.
So anyway.
Indeed.
I just, one thing I hope is that
whatever file gets generated out of
this, that it's not so noisy that
diffs of them over time become hard
to read.
For example, using the pip-tools
version, if you flip on hashing, like
the hashes take up so much of the, of
the text that, I feel like it's
just super hard to read all of a
sudden to just like diff a thing.
and go, okay, what's the, what's
new?
What's, what's changed?
What's the same, but it's just, ah,
you know, yeah, maybe I should
turn word wrap off or something on my
editor, but it's like, you're trying
to read, okay, this thing is installed
because these three things depend on
it, but there's just blocks of hashes
like all over the screen.
You know what I mean?
So, I, I, I did notice that
that was actually called out in the
rationale around it.
It said the format is designed so that
viewing a diff of the file is easy
by centralizing relevant details.
Um, Oh, awesome.
Yeah.
Like maybe it could have all the
things and why they're installed
there and then it could have the
hashes in a separate place.
You don't have to look at, you
know, that don't mix in.
Um, yeah, cool.
Yeah.
This is great.
I'm glad that that was a, that was,
that's part of the concern is to
make sure, because yeah, that's, I
might not read it maybe theoretically
human readable like XML, but the only
time I'm actually reading XML is in a
diff.
So yeah.
Yeah.
Anyway, cool.
Um, well, that's our items.
Do you have any extras for us?
I do feel a little extra today and I
hinted at this, some of the stuff
I'm gonna cover here.
So first of all, my pie has a new
release and there's some interesting
things to call out Brian, my pie 1.11.
So if you don't know, my pie is a, a
faux compiler for Python, I will say
it's a type checker, but what it does
is basically go through your code as
if it was a compiler and make sure
that everything would hang together.
Like here, you say this thing is an
integer and you're passing into a
function that can take an optional
integer, right?
not an optional string and it would
be an error and it would tell you
that it's not okay if it weren't
right.
Just like, like I said, like a
compiler kind of would.
So you can get that.
That's very cool.
Um, it has support for the, the new
312 simpler, generics, right?
Like class C of T's bracket T and
then you'd have T goes to et cetera,
et cetera.
Very nice there.
The one I wanted to call out there
was functools.partial.
You talked about functools, no,
iter tools last week.
Now how about functools?
Have you heard of functools.partial?
Yeah, I've used them.
I, the pretty, parcels are fun.
I've never used them.
So in Python, we can have default
values like F of A and B F of A comma
B, right?
You could say B equals one.
So you don't have to specify the
value, but it could be another value,
right?
It could be, if somebody wanted
to, they could override that, right?
You can't say here's a thing with a
default value, but never set it.
So you can say partial of that
function and specify the second
parameter or whichever parameter you
want, right?
And it'll, it'll pass that in.
But now my pie checks those.
We also get, better type
inference, better, type
hinting in expressions and a bunch of
other stuff.
So it's a pretty big release.
People can check that out if they want.
The thing that I hinted at the beginning
is fast HTML.
I know there's been a lot of talk about
this, right?
Yeah.
So fast HTML is a, well, they, they describe
themselves as a modern web application, building a framework for modern web applications
in pure Python.
Think kind of view components a little bit, but a flash style programming model for the server
side.
with a lot of those components actually written in Python, which is pretty interesting.
You can create them, make reusable things.
And it's, it's interaction and it's dynamic aspects are based on HTMX, which is one of my
very favorite, favorite JavaScript frameworks as well.
So if you were thinking of doing stuff like streamlet or Gradio or some of these dashboard
types of interactions, and you're like, I need to go beyond what those capable of this and not just
put dashboards, but more interactive elements and sort of more of a web app, but not a ton more.
Then this is a framework that it's upper bound as much higher where you can keep going and going.
So you can definitely create some, some cool apps real quickly with not very much code.
So I'm going to play with this a little bit more and I think I'll talk more about it next week.
I'm looking forward to that.
I was going to bring this up as well.
Yeah.
Looks interesting.
We could share it next week.
All right.
And then also we're coming up on last chance to go be part of the Python and web and database
course in a castle in Italy, the Python Zero to Hero 2024 event that I'm doing in a luxurious
Tuscan villa.
And hopefully you can be there.
But if you've been on the fence and thinking, maybe I want to go, but not sure.
I'll find, you know, on your to-do list to think more about it.
Well, you got to think soon because we're going to close enrollment pretty shortly.
So please, if you want to go, jump on that.
If not, that's totally good too.
And that's it for my extras.
All right.
I've got one extra.
Pretty much what I've been doing in my free time a lot is working on the new course,
Hellopytest, and I really want it to be accessible to everybody.
So I do have a landing page now.
It's if you go to courses.pythontest.com, you'll see a link to it.
There is, I don't know, I haven't decided what the final cost pricing structure is going to
be, but I'd like to start it at 10 bucks because I'd really like it to be something that people
can take a look at today.
So the idea around it is not to teach you all of pytest.
It is to get people started with it.
So to cover some of the basics like parameterization and fixtures and stuff.
And the idea being, I would love to have something to hand out to teammates so that everybody
can get up to speed so that the one pytest expert on the team doesn't get questions all
day long.
That's where I'm trying to fill this in.
So that's still up.
In order to do a pricing page, I had to pick a date where I was going to deliver it by.
I picked the 19th, which is what, 12 days from now.
I think it's going to be done before then, but that's my deadline.
So working on that.
Awesome.
Congrats.
You know, people, if you look around online courses, like especially Udemy, it's an arms
race to have the most content.
We have the super mega course that's 36 hours of content, you know, and it's like, and it's
only 50 bucks.
That one over there, that's 50 bucks.
It's only five hours.
That is nothing compared to this.
That's an additional 31 hours of your time you've got to put into it.
Right.
And not everybody has 36 hours of interest in learning pytest.
They just need enough to get going and get started.
And so I think there's real value in having like a concise.
Yeah.
I was surprised.
I was talking to a team that was considering my larger course and they decided not to because
it was because of them.
Like, they were like, oh, I really want somebody to be able to do this in a half a day.
Yeah, exactly.
Or less.
And I'm like, oh, okay.
So there's, there's real value in half a day or less courses.
So I think I agree.
I don't want to spend 36 hours learning anything.
I mean, I mean, over the course of the history of working with a tool.
Sure.
But over like right away.
No, I'm not going to do that.
So.
Yep.
Cool.
Exactly.
All right.
Let's look.
Want to joke about open source a little bit?
Yes.
All right.
So this, this joke is called open exclamation mark, AI exclamation mark.
So it has this sort of meme of two people talking to each other.
It says, hi, my name is open AI.
So you're open source, right?
Right.
No.
Not really.
Hmm.
Cool.
It should be closed AI.
Yeah.
At the bottom.
It does say, okay.
Open AI is not open source.
The open means that they're AI is open to receive our data.
Okay.
Very well.
Oh, yeah.
Okay.
Yeah.
Bart, Bart agrees with us.
Ain't nobody got time for that.
For long courses, not open AI.
Yeah.
All right.
Cool.
Well, good again to talk with you as always this week.
Thank you everybody for joining in on the live stream and everybody else for listening.
And I hope you have a wonderful rest of your summer or next week.
So talk to you next week.
Indeed.
Bye.
Wow.